# Particle Filter

## Overview

**Particle Filter* is a section in the PTM input where you set up
particle-filters. Particle Filter is designed to modify the particle
flux at node, without changing hydrodynamic condition, by keeping
particles from entering the specified waterbody.*

## Tables

**Example**

``` text
PARTICLE_FILTER 
NAME       NODE WATERBODY FILLIN FILE                 PATH 
filter_hor 8    chan:54   last   constant             0 
filter_nf  280  chan:357  last   ./Filter_OP_NF.dss   /HIST+FILTER/FILTER_NF/FILTER_OP//IR-DECADE/DWR-BDO/  
END
```

  

This is for a normal filter, which locates at a node connecting to any
waterbody. The PARTICLE_FILTER table defines particle filters by giving
them names, associating them to a node and a waterbody, and setting up
the passing efficiency (which could be constant value, or time-varying
data in DSS).

#### Field Descriptions

##### NAME

Name assigned to the particle filter. This is the identifier of the
filter used elsewhere to refer to the filter.

##### NODE

The ID of the node to which the filter is attached.

##### AT_WB

The type and ID of the waterbody to which the filter is attached .

##### FILLIN

Method for filling in data if the time step of the assigned series is
coarser than the time step of the model. SeeÂ fillin types.

##### FILE

DSS or text file in which data are stored. Use consistent case when
referring to the same file. You may also enter the word *constant *if
you would like to assign a constant value to the input (the value will
be entered in the next column).**

##### PATH

**The path within the text or DSS file of the time series data. If you
used the *constant* keyword in the Input File column, enter the value
here. The stored variable is particle passing efficiency, a float value
between 0 ~ 1: 0-block; 1-totally pass.**

  

Filter locates on 1 node, at the side of 1 waterbody (channel,
reservoir, source flow). Every filter is unique with 1 node & 1
waterbody.

Filter is 2-directional, and is designed to function differently for
each direction \<1\> waterbody-\>node: filter serves as a totally block
with passing efficiency 0; \<2\> node-\>waterbody: filter is designed
for changing particle decision-making, with passing efficiency as a
re-adjusting factor; thus it only functions when node is connected with
multiple waterbodies; i.e. it will not have any effect for a single
chain of channel

Currently there's no delay concept for filter, because the filter delay
rule is unknown, and our major concern is particles' fate (particle's
movement only depends on hydro conditions, not interacted with each
other)

  

  

  
